Speaker 1: So, we're gonna get started in about a minute. But this is a very small tent—it's supposed to be a very intimate workshop. I know you all are playing the back rows just like my students would in the classroom because you're trying to - I don't know - for whatever reason.
Speaker 1: I would just encourage people to move up because, again, there's not a lot of us here anyways, and this way you can hear us better, you can hear the music better.
Speaker 1: So again, I'm not gonna force you but I do encourage you just to move up the front row, because — like I can see y'all in the back, it doesn't really — you're not hiding from anyone right now. All right thank you.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes. Check— 1, 2.
Speaker 2: Hello, Hello. Good [exaggerated question tone] afternoon?
Adriel Lewis: Good noon... Good day, all. How are y'all feelin' today?
[audience claps]
Adriel Lewis: Alright, it is hella hot. um. My name is Adriel Lewis, I am a curator at the Smithsonian Asian Pacific American Center.
Adriel Lewis: Uh, I'm so juiced to be here at the Folklife Festival, sharing some space with you in all this hot, hot humidity.
Adriel Lewis: Uh, I'm here with two amazing individuals - Oliver Wang - who is an amazing DJ and amazing music writer.
Adriel Lewis: Um, I kinda came up following his blog "Soul Sides", uh, where he digs out all this amazing wax.
Adriel Lewis: Uh, awesome soul music, awesome Latin Boogaloo music.
Adriel Lewis: And, uh, also recently published a book on Filipino-American turntablisms, which I think probably mentioned in a bit, or now will, now that I've said that.
Adriel Lewis: Next to him is DJ Fatrick, uh also uh, from Houston, originally. And then uh, I met him living in the Bay Area. And now he's based in LA. So kinda, spanned up and down California.
Adriel Lewis: He is a DJ for Bamboo, who is an MC out here. You can catch him later on today over at the Sensa California Tent at 4:15.
Adriel Lewis: Um, and also just an amazing DJ and producer in his own right as well.
Adriel Lewis: And so um, we're here today to talk about the history of Asian-American hip-hop,
Adriel Lewis: which I think maybe for some of you, might be uh, a concept that's foreign or maybe even paradoxical.
Adriel Lewis: And so we'll kind of pick that apart in a little bit.
Adriel Lewis: I'm gonna pull out my notes real quick to make sure I give some shout-outs to people who have made it possible.
Adriel Lewis: So of course we're here at the Smithsonian Folklife Festival.
Adriel Lewis: Co-sponsored by the National Park Service, the American Anthropological Association, Radio Bilingue, and the California Traditional Arts Council.
Adriel Lewis: There are awesome programs happening every hour on the hour here, so feel free to stay tuned.
Adriel Lewis: Hang out in the shade, if you will. And uh, I'll share some more programs that are kind of relevant to what we're talking about, later on in this session.
Adriel Lewis: Um, but I guess with that set, I want to just hand the mic over to these two to kind of just, um, fill in any other kinds of introductions.
Adriel Lewis: But I guess maybe we could start off by just kind of learning about how each of you came to - or were introduced to the concept of - Asian-Americans in hip-hop in the first place.
Speaker 1: Actually Patrick, you wanna begin because I think you have, you just sort of want to elaborate on what we're trying to do with this panel.
Speaker 2: Right, right. Well, I think one thing Bamboo and I always want to be clear about is that we don't believe there are such things,
Speaker 2: anything unique or specific or separate as a genre of Asian or Asian American hip hop.
Speaker 2: We are Asian Americans who participate in a black art form, you know, called hip hop, that we are very much inspired,
Speaker 2: and it's a tool that we use to create with,so I want to make that clear first of all.
Speaker 2: And to answer Angel's question, um, how did I get interested in Asian American hip hop?
Speaker 2: I'm Asian, I'm Asian American, so, you know, when we talk about representation,
Speaker 2: there's not a lot of us in pop culture, especially--I mean, I think now it might be different,
Speaker 2: but when I was growing up in the eighties and nineties, they didn't see much of our faces, whether in Hollywood or rock music or hip hop,
Speaker 2: so I think just, because of my identity, I get excited when I see folks who look like me,
Speaker 2: but also doing amazing music period. It's nice.
Speaker 1: I would just add there, I think there's also a simpler explanation for
Speaker 1: why you have generations of Asian Americans in this is partly sort of what we'll be talking about with an annotated playlist today of why Asian Americans have gotten interested in hip hop,
Speaker 1: cause I've gotten this question a lot over the years as someone who writes as a journalist and as a scholar about the topic,
Speaker 1: um, and it's simply that as we've been alive over the last forty years,
Speaker 1: and as hip hop has been the dominant form of youth culture and youth music over those four decades,
Speaker 1: um, it's not surprising that young people of all backgrounds across the world would feel some kind of connection in hip hop simply,
Speaker 1: because it has been pervasive, it is,
Speaker 1: it is a ubiquitous sound of sort of youth identity, and community, and politics, and culture that has surrounded the world over the last forty years,
Speaker 1: so, I think there's some sort of simpler explanations, even though I agree with Patrick that there are,
Speaker 1: you know, particular kind of political and social reasons why Asian Americans in seeking -- I'm gonna use this with sort of scare [[square]] quotes in seeking some kind of voice that would look to hip hop because it is such a dominant way in which one speaks.
Speaker 1: It is a, you know, a form of expression, uh very free format that, um that makes it attractive to not just Asian Americans but young people from, again, across the world.
Speaker 1: So what we, over the last few days, Patrick and I have sat down, and,
Speaker 1: um, have basically gone over the last, you know, thirty-seven years of, of Asian Americans participating in hip hop in some form or other,
Speaker 1: and so we've created a short sampling of a playlist that looks at the various ways and dimensions that Asian Americans -- it's really specifically looking at rappers because we wanted to do something that was audio-based.
Speaker 1: Um, we could have done something on the history of dance or the history of DJing;
Speaker 1: in fact, we'll be talking about DJing later today at 2:45 in the studio, just across the way,
Speaker 1: we'll be doing the history of the evolution of DJ styles, but for today's sessions, uh today's session right now, we just sort want to get like a sampling.
Speaker 1: This is not meant to be a definitive or a comprehensive playlist, cause that would take us the entire weekend, but it kind of just gives you a few glimpses throughout history.
Speaker 1: Um, so I thought we could begin with, um, 1979, Joe Baton, and a song called Rap-O Clap-O,
Speaker 1: and just to give some quick context behind this, Joe Baton came up, uh, he is, his father was Filipino American,his mother was African American.
Speaker 1: He grew up as sort of a homeless and honorary Puerto Rican in the New York Latin Music Scene in the 1960s,
Speaker 1: and by the, um, 1970s, he was thoroughly involved in the salsa-disco crossover craze,
Speaker 1: and as someone, as a musician and artist with his ear to the proverbial street, uh
Speaker 1: Joe Baton started to hear what was the early beginnings of hip hop coming up from places like the South Bronx and other places in New York,
Speaker 1: and in 1979, he cut what ended up being one of the first international hip-hop hits.
Speaker 1: It's not a song that a lot of us remember today, unlike, let's say, Rapper's Delight,
Speaker 1: but it actually charted, at the time, it allowed him to tour across Europe with it -- in fact, you can find videos of him performing in Europe this song,
Speaker 1: and so this is 1979's Rap-O Clap-O.
[[Music]]
Speaker 1: And let us know if you need the volume turned up.
[[Music Continued]]
Speaker 1: So very, I mean, especially for that era of the late 1970s, a very classic disco influence party rap song,
Speaker 1: like there's not necessarily a lot of content depth to it, but, you know, it was him trying to get on top of this trend that by,
Speaker 1: I mean, 1979, it wasn't a trend yet, I mean, it was just something bubbling up into the recorded world of music,
Speaker 1: but again, you know, Baton as a self-identified Afro-Filipino, um, was sort of on the forefront of this.
Speaker 2: Um, and I was asking him how old Joe Baton was when he did this, and he had a career already; he already had a blooming, thriving community --
Speaker 1: He was in his thirties; he was not a young man at this point --
Speaker 2: Right, so that's smart, right? For, to be in that level of career, and be like, I gotta, recognizing the power of what these kids were doing,
Speaker 2: cause hip hop was kind of being written up, rap was being written up.
Speaker 1: So, now we're going to move into the 1980s and that for the most part is a sort of a vacuum in the - and I wanna be very specific about it - it's a vacuum in the recorded history of Asian American rappers.
There were certainly rappers that were out there, it's just very few of them were actually leaving behind any kind of recorded evidence of their existence, and a lar--partly this had to do with access to the means of making a record, of releasing a record, distributing and whatnot.
It's really not until the early 90s that you begin to see rappers who've already been active throughout the 80s finally uh, you know, getting recorded and in some way, in--in different ways, self-identifying themselves as, as Asian American.
I think one of the more interesting examples is Fresh Kid Ice, who was a member--a core member of the 2 Live Crew out of Miami.
He is half-Chinese, half-Trinidadian, and in 1992 he released an album called "The Chinaman," and this is one of the singles off that album from '92 called I'll Be Here.
Patrick: Who knows 2 Live Crew? Alright.
[[Music plays]] [[Lyrics]] Hey yo, Chris man, I got this girl, man, she fine and everything, man, but she always talking bout money, man.
She always talking about getting her hair done, her nails done, and you know, times are hard, man, I ain't got it right now, man, what should I do, man?
[[second voice]] Well man, let me tell you about the kind of girl you need.
This is the song that goes to the ladies who put up with men when times seem crazy.
Living through hell, in bad situations, when nothing's right, filled with frustrations.
Women that's strong, a permanent shoulder. One who's there so a man can hold her a little tighter in the middle of the night, on a rainy day when times are tight.
One who's dared to solve the puzzle. Keep him tryin' to continue to struggle. And to you lady, I sing this song, I'll be around--
Whenever you call me, I'll be there. Whenever you want me, I'll be there. [[music fades]]
Speaker 1: So, by the mid to late 1990s is really where you see the first flowering of Asian American hip-hop artists who not only self-identify as being Asian American--
again, you could certainly argue that Fresh Kid Ice was doing that by entitling his album "The Chinaman."
But in terms of the song content, actually, um, including issues around identity, issues around politics and community, um, it's really this generation of rap artists who are very much inspired by the political hip-hop coming out in the early 1990s,
that encourages them to want to pursue hip-hop themselves and use the forms of hip-hop-- rapping, DJ-ing, dancing, etcetera--
as forms of self-expression that engages and really explicitly discusses what it means to be Asian American or Chinese American or where-have-you.
And, so, one of the key acts of this era was a group out of Philadelphia. It was a trio of Chinese American men named, called "The Mountain Brothers,"
and they were, I mean their sort of claim-to-fame is they were for a brief moment signed to Ruffhouse Records, which would have made them - had their album actually come out - it would have made them the first, uh, kind-of Asian American hip-hop group to have gotten an album out.
Um, things didn't work out with the label, which is a very common, you know, story that you hear amongst many, many artists.
Uh, but they ended up self-releasing their stuff independently, and this is one of the songs they put out around cerca 1996, 1997 called "The Days of Being Dumb."
And, again, in the very first verse, you hear the producer/MC Chops, uh, being very, kind-of again, very explicit about who and how he identifies.
[[Music plays]]
[[Lyrics]] I remember way back (I remember way back.)
I remember way back (Way back.)
I remember way back (I remember way back.)
Flippin' the page, back in the days when this little fat Asian kid would sit making beats in the basement on a basic rolling drum box, stolen from Scots. Sneakin' in and listening to Dr. Rockin' Dallas in the PMO weekend.
That was me then, sure enough, that I'd won rock in the tide-1 warm-ups. Pull my highs un-tied for kicks in junior high.
They put sad little tags on hats and jackets with acrylics, actually answered back to the fat ones when they was asking, can you feel it?
Taking up all day making a pause-tape and always late for dinner at the center of my attention I never mentioned.
Understanding clear the number of the man in the mirror and maybe my baby brother, so why bother? Even communicatin' is beautiful fascination to my father.
Wanted to rock it harder than Herby since early-on when I first heard these songs. And still today, continue my ways from the days of bein' dumb.
Speaker 1: So, Patrick, I mean, you're basically half a generation younger than me and I certainly came of age in the era where The Mountain Brothers were a really, really big deal because, you know, we thought of them as the first.
I'm wondering, were you aware of them growing up in Sugar Land, Texas, in that area?
Patrick: No
Speaker 1: Cause you would've been in the high school, right?
Patrick: No, no, no. When did this come out?
Speaker 1: This was probably '97 or '98.
Patrick: Oh, yeah. I was not, I was not aware of them until I went to Berekley, California. And then, um, Asian American studies-- there's a pre-Myspace called Asian Avenue and, uh, they put out CDs, like compilations CDs of Asian American pop-music, so, rock, pop, R&B, and hip-hop, and they were on there.
So, "Galaxies" was the first song that blew my mind 'cause they're Taiwanese American, like, like where my family's from.
Speaker 1: So I actually came across Mountain Brothers on TV, and I think this was a very California thing. So --
How many of you are from the Bay Area? Anybody?
OK, so there's probably equivalents in this D.C. area, but Channel 26 in the Bay Area was like the international --
is the international channel so you can like, you know, get Chinese news and then afterwards it would be like Korean soap opera,
but then like, from, like, 4 to 6 it was the California music channel.
And so you had these DJs from local radio stations that were playing a mixture of, like,
hip-hop, R'n'B and also, like, Filipino-American R'n'B and, like, freestyle music.
And then one day there was like this music video with, like, Chinese dudes rapping and playing mahjong.
I was like, 'What is this?' So I ran over to -- to the CD store,
or drove over, rather, uh, and and yeah, and I found it and it was just, like, a drawing of -- the cover was like a cartoon drawing of like three Chinese people,
and it was like in the hip-hop section so I was like, I gotta buy this!
And I think a lot of the early searching in the Bay Area was kind of that, like,
just buying a record because you saw a drawing or a picture of like an Asian person and just, kind of like, hoping it would be dope, but.
Speaker 2: I mean, I also think this goes back to a point that both of you made earlier,
is just the -- especially growing up in the -- in my case the 80s, Patrick, in Patrick's case the 90s, and 0-0s,
just sort of the desperation to see yourself represented anywhere in pop culture, not -- I mean -- not specifically hip-hop but just really across the board.
I mean I think things have changed significantly in the last,
let's say, 10 years, and really just in the last, like, 5 years, but you know, it was, it was -- it felt like a complete vacuum for a very long time.
So someone like the Mountain Brothers was sort of enthralling simply because it reflected the reality that we who were already hip-hop fans,
or budding performers were already aware, which was sort of our existence,
but we just didn't see that reflected back to us anywhere. The first sort-of quasi -- I'm sorry, do you want to add anything?
Speaker 1: Oh then, I just wanna add that Chops is still actively involved in doing music, producing for a lot of folks out there, so look him up.
Speaker 1: Um, like he just did a couple of sound track songs off of what movie was that. Um, oh God I can't remember now.  All right never mind.  Strike, strike that.
Speaker 1: So, the first I, I would say quasi household name in Asian American Hip-Hop was a rapper, a Chinese American rapper out of Miami by way of New York or maybe it was the other way around named Jin, and Jin came to Jin came to fame because he won the BET's one of six part freestyle battle.   I think it was something like seven or eight rounds in a row and based off of that exposure he was offered a contract and was released, he released an album on the Ruff Ryders label which again was unprecedented. Those were not examples that you could find of
Speaker 2: Ruff Ryders, anybody know who the Ruff Ryders are?  DMX
Speaker 1: Ok.  Yeah, I keep forgetting it's 2016 now. So yeah
Speaker 2: You want to play this?
Speaker 1: So, and so this was very strategic.  Jin's first single on the Ruff Ryders label was a song called "Learn Chinese".  And in earlier years some Asian American artists would try to not necessarily engage with their ethnic racial identity that explicitly because they really wanted to be seen as artists first, Asian Americans second.
Speaker 1: But I think Jin makes a very interesting kind of preempted strike of a sort which is I'm going to put my racial identity out there in the front end so that I don't necessarily have to come back and address it later, and you can tell from the very first word he says yeah I'm Chinese and what.  It's basically this challenge, I dare you to make something out of my, my racial background.
Speaker 2: I think but also before he played in interviews I've watched of him he hated, he hates the single. And I think it wasn't completely Jin's
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: agency to be like I want to be [[?]]
Speaker 1: right
Speaker 2: because I think like a lot of records are like you've got to do this you've got to do this.
Speaker 1: Right
Speaker 2: And then Wyclef produces beat and even the beat is very oriental like.
Speaker 1: Ching Chongy would be the way that I [[?}}
Speaker 2: But we'll play it for you
[[Recording of "Learn Chinese"]] Yeah, I'm Chinese and what. You know who this is, Jin Let me tell you this The days of pork fried rice and chicken wings coming to your house by me is over
Ya'll gon' learn Chinese Ya'll gon' learn Chinese Ya'll gon' learn Chinese When the pumps come out, you're gon' to speak Chinese
Ya'll gon' learn Chinese Ya'll gon' be Chinese Ya'll gon' learn Chinese When the pumps come out, your gon' speak Chinese
This Hip-Hop shit could fuck up your head man I know a bunch of Crips that love red man Blood walk in New York, man, things done change Stop, the Chinks be all over the game
This ain't Bruce Lee, You watch too much TV This is a game of death when I aim for your chest Too much cess got me seein' slow motion Eyes barely open with a roach roastin'
And your girl, she loves the Jin ocean Rub it on her body like Body Shop lotion What's the commotion, you never seen me The original chinky-eyed emcee
You don't want to step to the army And Double-R rank refugee And the barrel of the gun gonna make you speak another language And Amigo I ain't talking about Spanish Ya'll gon' learn Chinese [[Recording of "Learn Chinese"/]]
Speaker 1: And so again you can hear very explicitly, very defiant almost way in which he really is engaging his Chineseness and again is sort of daring people to make something of it.  I mean I don't like the song esthetically, but as a scholar I could write, I feel like I could write an entire dissertation as deconstructing both the song and the video because it's, it's just layered in both deconstructing stereotypes, but also reengaging them, but anyways I digress.
Speaker 1: So this came out about 2002, I think.  And really the 2000's, I mean I mention the 90's were kind of the initial renaissance from which you begin to see more Asian American Hip-Hop artists coming into a public eye but it is really since over the last 15 years where there has just been an explosion.  And I think this is a good time to talk about the group that Patrick himself is involved in or was involved in which was the trio of Kiwi, Bamboo, who is also performing here at the Folk Festival and then Patrick which is a trio called Native Guns.  And P do you want to talk a little bit about the background of Native Guns?
Speaker 2: Native Guns started, Native Guns is two Filipino Americans whose from, who both grew up in L.A.  Bamboo who is here performing in the Festival and Kiwi and they both work have solo careers Filipino Americans and Kiwi was very much a part of also the activism, the Filipino activism movement.  And, Bam was just starting to kind of get involved with that and it was like it was at a concert for a Homey who had who had been murdered.  They had a funeral for him.  They had a memorial for him and they both performed, they hey, and that's when they first connected.  And they decided to try some tracks together, and that's when they connected.
Speaker 1: And broadly speaking, what kind of things did Native Guns rap about, talk about, engage with.
Speaker 2: Native Guns is a as you call it a very politically conscious rap group.
Speaker 1: So what do you wanna play for us?
Speaker 2: Band -- We'll call it gangsta rap but with a third dimension to it.
You know, talking about more than just the two-dimensional aspects of it.
So we're gonna play a song off the first album "Barrel Men" and the song's called "Hammer".
[[Music plays]]
Singer 1: I see you, bastard
Singer 2: Put up a pistol and whistle a warning by calling your people to war.
Whether it's marching a rally and all of us battling and out to get more for the poor.
Attacking political strategists, people with cameras. Savages ready to go.
I coulda shut the fuck up but I was nice enough to let y'all motherfuckers know;
It's time for the victimized to be let inside and be given a shot to be heard. Instead of just sitting around for another let-down. Together was bound to be burned.
The table is turning, and every direction is us getting 'f'ed in the 'a' and every day another young brother gets carried away in 1 in 3 different ways.
One: Getting too heated and pulling the heat to get backed to get a man clapped.
Two: Getting carried away in a body-bag from being on the wrong end of a gat.
Three: Getting carried away handcuffed to your back and pigs putting kicks in your ribs.
It's a twisted psychology, tragedy, comedy. And that just how it motherfucking is.
We live in the last days - the Patriot Act - our veterans still in a rut.
Nat-ive Guns. That's what's up. 1-2-3 bruh, brrup-brup-brup-brup.
Belt buckle hiked up, now I'm ready to roll. My people, y'all ready to go?
Where my soldiers at? Give me 5 seconds to grab my Roscoe and get on the road, baby.
Native Guns.
Raise it all.
Whether you that (Bru-bru-bru)
LA go (Bru-bru-bru)
Speaker 1: Just a real quite question. I realize it's now 12:23. How many of are you are planning to go to a session at 12:30?
Because we have this space until 12:45, but if people are going to be jetting in like 7 minutes, then I wanted to create enough time for any audience questions. But if you're all with us until then, then we'll keep going.
So is anyone here planning on going to something else at 12:30?
Alright, captive audience. Okay.
Um. [[clicks tongue]]
Let's see. What else do we -- Let's talk about um, --
I mean, we haven't really talked about sort of the regional differences and we've mentioned, like, where different people have come from city-wise but,
certainly Seattle has been one important space in which you see, um, you know.
It has -- number 1 -- a large API population and uh, Seattle has had a long hip-hop history into itself.
One of the key groups to emerge out of there in the 00's, was a group called "Blue Scholars".
Which in a lot of ways, I mean -- Peter was saying to me earlier -- you know Macklemore, like Blue Scholars was critical to sort of, Macklemore's emergence out of that city, right?
Speaker 2: Right. Well, Blue Scholars was the first -- it's not -- definitely not by any means the first rap group out of Seattle. We have Sir Mix-a-Lot, um, [[Crosstalk]] Nasty Nas --
Speaker 1: [[Crosstalk]] Nasty Nas' Dj, right?
Speaker 2: -- was a DJ for him. Um. They were the first hip-hop group that a lot of the suburban white kids, who were really into rock music --
They - that was the first rap group that they got into. So it took Seattle rap to a whole new level of, uh, of, um, of exposure.
So they were like selling out 900 person venues. They were like the hometown heroes.
And they created a climate where you could be an independent rapper in Seattle, and succeed.
And so Macklemore -- who is a homie -- um, was definitely one of the young homies who was always rapping with us, on shows with us, and um --
Speaker 1: And the members of Blue Scholars are?
Speaker 2: They're Sabzi the producer-DJ, and Geologic -- well, Prometheus Brown, the MC, who's Filipino-American. And Sobzi is Iranian.
So we'll play -- this is their first single called "No Rest For The Weary".
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: I think '05.
Speaker 1: Okay.
[[Music plays]]
[[Music]]
[[Music Fades]]
Speaker 1: One thing that we-we should also mention is that one reason why there has been this massive flowering of Asian American rap artists over the last fifteen years is that the means of production and distribution have changed dramatically, right.
Speaker 1: It used to be that-- if you wanted to put out a record you needed some kind of gatekeeper to sign you, to basically fund your-- the production of your-- the engineering, the mastering, the physical manufacturing of the CD or the Cassette or the vinyl LP and then distribute it to stores.
Speaker 1: So there was a lot of layers of very skeptical people that you had to convince. And as an Asian American like your product was legitimate-- it could find an audience. But largely, because of the Internet you can now create-- distribute these things, market these things all on your own.
Speaker 1: And I think one of the spaces that has really opened up has been for Asian American female artists to merge out of this. And you can go all the way back to the early 1980's to find examples of Asian American women rapping.
Speaker 1: It's just that very few of them were able to get recorded doing it because of-- again-- the difficulties of the means of production. And it's really been in these last ten years that there's been, really, a bounty of many more Asian American women finally entering into this because they can now, kind of, jump the line. They can skip all the gatekeepers and just create their own work and then put it out there.
Speaker 1: One example of this would be Rocky Rivera from the Bay Area and this is a freestyle she put out a couple years ago called "Slick Talk."
[[Music]]
[[Music Fades]]
Speaker 1: And then Ari and so I should've mentioned that Rocky Rivera is Filipina-American, again out of the Bay Area. And perhaps sort of the-the Asian American female artists who have come most to the fore is a Korean American artist out of New York City named Awkwafina.
Speaker 1: And again, largely because she can create her own videos, produce her own music, and then put it on Youtube or put it on Soundcloud. It's given her the ability to find that audience that in previous generations would've been much, much more difficult.
Speaker 1: This is a song she put out a couple of years ago on Youtube with her own video called "Yellow Ranger."
[[Music]]
[[Music Fades]]
Speaker 1: Patrick, do you want to add anything about, sort of, the way Internet distribution had been-- I mean I know there's-- it's not a panacea but it's certainly created opportunities for artists to release their own material in ways that didn't exist in the past.
Speaker 2: You were saying before--it took-- it was like a months long process to put anything out because of the mixing-mastering process. Now, Bam and I, we-we can record a song tonight and put it out in the morning for the Festival Goers, you know, on Youtube. As long as we have a mic, a computer program, and Internet-- WiFi access.
Speaker 1: And if you wanted to make a video for that song, you can probably whip that together in a matter of weeks, if not days?
Speaker 2: Right. And we're not limited by physical areas, like that would be global. [[Stuttered]] And that's how Awkwafina got blew up. She blew up globally, internationally, through the Internet through Youtube videos.
Adriel Lewis: Yeah I think that's one thing that also has, kind of, come with online distribution is, um, before it was, kind of, perceived as like-- you know, and-and this is across the board with music, that-that you really only made it, if you made it in America, right.
Adriel Lewis: But, um, with Internet distribution, what also happened is I think-- you see artists like Dumbfoundead, Awkwafina, Bamboo, who-who have embraced a global audience. And started to understand the draw a diaspora, right, and so you have artists who are actually not just touring within the U.S but also touring throughout Asia.
Adriel Lewis: Bamboo, yesterday, during his set, was talking about, you know, kind of a testimonial of the first time he performed in the Philippines, and how going to Manila for the first time, when he was started rocking the crowd, like, everybody in the audience knew the words to his music already.
Adriel Lewis: And-and that's-- I think, wouldn't have been possible in the era of record stores.
Adriel Lewis: And I think also, folks, I think, in the 90's and early 2000's were really just tryna prove themselves in a more insular hip-hop community. Where now, you really do see folks who are kind of walking, you know, in between different kinds of spaces.
Adriel Lewis: And so someone like Dumbfoundead will rock a crowd that's, you know, a completely diverse crowd in L.A and then go over to Seoul and rock a crowd in South Korea and-and in front of a wholly Korean audience.
Adriel Lewis: And so you really kind of see folks who aren't as, uh, worried about trying to hide the fact that they are Asian. Which I think was kind of like, a-an underground phenomenon of-of the 90's and-and early 2000's, um, and yeah.
Adriel Lewis: I think-- I think one more thing that's also really interesting is the kind of the bilingual aspect that has kind of incorporated itself into his music. But I think, you know-- I don't know if you have Andersen .Paak on the playlist but I think he's a-- he's a great example of someone who actually you know he is-- he is, uh, Black and Korean.
Adriel Lewis: He actually came up largely in-in Asian American hip-hop community, uh, playing with like Dumbfoundead and folks like that. And then he got taken on by Dr. Dre and is now kind of in the same camp with like Kendrick Lamar. But he still rocks, you know, he recently rocked Cam Fest which is, uh, an Asian American media festival.
Adriel Lewis: And you see these artists who are reaching this mainstream success but still, kind of, tapping back into their Asian American, uh, organizing grassroots.
Speaker 1: And in terms of mainstream success
Speaker 1: we would be remiss in not, uh,
Speaker 1: acknowledging the number one biggest hit
Speaker 1: of an Asian-American rap group
Speaker 1: which is "Like a G6" by
Speaker 1: Far East Movement, um,
Speaker 1: Let me play this real quick and
Speaker 1: we'll follow this with some comments
Speaker 1: though I'm sure most people here probably heard this song at some point,
Speaker 1: maybe too much.
[[music starts]]
song lyric: Poppin' bottles in the ice
song lyric: like a blizzard
song lyric: When we drink we do it right
song lyric: gettin' slizzard
song lyric: Sippin sizzurp in my ride (in my ride)
song lyric: like three six
song lyric: Now I'm feelin' so fly
song lyric: like a G6
song lyric: like a G6 x2
song lyric: Now I'm feelin' so fly
song lyric: like a G6
song lyric: like a G6 x2
song lyric: Now I'm feelin' so fly
song lyric: like a G6
song lyric: Gimme that Moet (et)
song lyric: Gimme that Crystal (tal)
song lyric: Ladies love my style, at my table gettin' wild
[[music fades]]
song lyric: Get them bottles poppin', we get that drip and that drop
Speaker 2: That's enough, that's enough.
Speaker 1: Patrick is exercising the DJ's prerogative to cut off a song
Speaker 1: he doesn't want to listen to that long
[[audience laughs]]
Speaker 1: Um, this was what, 2012, 2010?
Speaker 1: I'm losing track of my years now
Speaker 2: No, it was- was it earlier than that?
Speaker 1: It was around 2009, 2010 I think
[[audience member]] MySpace era
Speaker 1: Uh, yeah MySpace era
Speaker 2: "The end of MySpace"
Speaker 1: I mean what's notable about Far East Movement
Speaker 1: even though that song is very, like,
Speaker 1: EDM influenced, it's very, what you could describe
Speaker 1: as very pop mainstream,
Speaker 1: Far East Movement themselves, their roots are really in
Speaker 1: a lot of the, kind of, underground spaces, that um,
Speaker 1: that Angel was just describing and
Speaker 1: the crew themselves they're sort of like this
Speaker 1: kind of Er-Asian-American group because they have a Korean-American, uh I think a
Speaker 1: Japanese-American and a Filipino-American DJ as part of the trio, um
Speaker 1: And they really got their start performing largely in Korea Town, Los Angeles, um
Speaker 1: ya know bars and venue spaces before eventually crossing over on the strength of
Speaker 1: kind of club dance hits like "Like a G6."
Speaker 1: But what's notable is that I mean this song
Speaker 1: was the number 1, hit number 1 around, again, around
Speaker 1: 2010, but that had been, you know, 30 plus years in the making in terms of for an Asian-American
Speaker 1: In fact, they were not only the first Asian-American rap group to get a number 1,
Speaker 1: they were the first Asian-American group of any genre to have a number 1 pop hit since
Speaker 1: The Jets in the 19-- the mid 1980's who were a Tongan family. And so,
Speaker 1: or first Asian Pacific Islander groups. So, it had taken
Speaker 1: 30 years for another Asian-American to kind of rise to the top of the pop charts in any genre,
Speaker 1: it doesn't matter if it's Hip-Hop, Rock, whatever, um
Speaker 1: which very notable, and it kind of speaks for the ways in which Asian-Americans are largely
Speaker 1: absent from the Pop landscape. Um, Patrick and I last night,
Speaker 1: we also wanted to sort of share an example of the fact that just, I mean, a lot of the examples
Speaker 1: we played, I think have reflected a certain kind of consciousness, a certain kind of positivity,
Speaker 1: but certainly, there is a lot of very ignorant Asian-American rap out there as well,
Speaker 1: and the choices are really, there is a bountiful number of ones to choose from.
Speaker 1: Uh, we went with a group, an artist, perhaps, a pertinently named Stupid Young,
Speaker 1: uh, who is a Cambodian-American rapper from uh Long Beach, California. This is a song
Speaker 1: called "Don't Worry About Me"
[song starts]
song lyric: Don't worry about me, I'm good
song lyric: They never seen a young Asian this hood
song lyric: so imma let 'em know, you're professional, 'nuff to blow,
song lyric: flexin so I get, fresh and dressed in clothes to get the dough
song lyric: uh, watcha know bout that? Eastside Long Beach I put that on the map,
song lyric: so every time I come around [bleeped out] bout 'dat,
song lyric: cuz they know they never met a youngin like me around
song lyric: they say they like my style and the way I get down.
song lyric: All them haters talking tell 'em shh don't make a sound. Cuz I'm
song lyric: back in the scene, and I'm back with my team. Gotta
song lyric: get them Benjamins I keep them stacks in my jeans. Uh,
song lyric: and I take yo [bleeped out],
song lyric: like that ain't yo [bleeped out]
song lyric: [background vocals]
song lyric: All eyes on me and my clique
[song fades]
Speaker 2: I want to push back a little bit, I think we were, before
Speaker 2: before we played this song we kind of, we were kind of hatin' a little bit on him,
Speaker 2: but it's actually from, uh, a social-political perspective, it's a pretty powerful song.
Speaker 2: Cuz this is a Cambodian-American living in Long Beach, uh, that's putting music out.
Speaker 2: And, so, the song itself is a great representation of
Speaker 2: where Cambodian-Americans are, in like a social, political, economic
Speaker 2: scene in the United States, also within Asian-America. Cuz one thing that's always
Speaker 2: conflated is Asian-America is a really complex monocurve for peoples, right? I mean,
Speaker 2: there's a lot of different experiences, so, you have, uh,
Speaker 2: the East Asian experience, you have folks that might represent that like
Speaker 2: Far East Movement. Then you have Young Stupid, ya know living in
Speaker 2: the hood of uh, Long Beach. Um, so,
Speaker 2: I think it's important that we do play it and recognize like the--
[speaker 1 interrupts]
Speaker 1: I mean, I think that grand point is that there's a spectrum
Speaker 1: Asian-Americans are involved in sort of every version of Hip-Hop that's out there,
Speaker 1: including trap, ya know. And I don't think it's a bad song aesthetically,
Speaker 1: but again, it's very different than, let's say, what the Mountain Brothers are doing.
Speaker 2: Right, right
Speaker 1: and that's part of the point of that. Um, we'll end with an artist that angel had mentioned,
Speaker 1: which is a Korean-American rapper out of Los Angeles named Dumbfounded,
Speaker 1: and I kind of wish we had the ability to project video here, because
Speaker 1: a lot of, the kind of impact of this song is really made manifest in the video that accompanies it.
Speaker 1: But it's a song called "Safe" that he recorded months ago, and it's really about the lack of media representation of Asian-Americans in popular media.
[[Music]] that was the first mistake, who said I was safe
pew, pew, pew, pew
The other night I watched the Oscars the roster of the only yellow men were all statues Woah, yeah
We a quarter where the population there's a room of 1 percenters laughing at you, yeah
Fuck a bamboo ceilin, guess I gotta play the villain
ODB up at the Grammys on the mic like Wu-Tang is for the children!
Bruce Jenner is a woman, OJ was acquitted, Kim K is a hero,
The sky is the limit, any minute now they gon' let an Asian brotha' get a lead role,
shots fired, Imma reload
never saw this side of Chino
He was always quiet keeping to himself, never messed with anybody else that's the Jonathan that we know
Seems so safe 'til one day... [[music slowly fades out]]
[[Speaking]]
Speaker 1: So the song is called Safe, the artist is Dumbfoundead. I do encourage people to check out their video because it really plays directly with this idea of the absence of Asian Americans in popular media.
Speaker 1: So, again this was just like a twelve-thirteen song sampler we could've done, easily sometimes, something ten times the length of it.
Speaker 1: Um anything else you wanna add before we turn things over to the audience? Questions or comments from [[indistinguishable]] --anything you wanna add?
Speaker 1: Alright, anything you guys wanna ask, wanna add, comment on, etc. Don't be shy.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes sir?
Audience Member: [[inaudible question]]
Speaker 1: The question is about K-Pop and its popularity.
Speaker 1: I think that's actually a fantastic question because what's interesting is, um this was about maybe two years ago,
Speaker 1: but Young Money which is, uh Lil' Wayne's label signed a, uh a K-Pop act to their label, which seemed very odd at the time
Speaker 1: and initially the thought was, this would be a way to sort of break um, you know an Asian, that, that young money wanted to use this act to break in,
Speaker 1: to help them break into the American Market.
Speaker 1: But it actually seems much more strategic in the other way, is that by signing a K-Pop act, it was a way for Young Money to get into the K-Pop market because it's so incredibly lucrative.
Speaker 1: So I don't know if it's necessarily helping or hurting, um I think we're still in the early era
Speaker 1: in which-- what Asian American, or just any kind of American artist-- their ability to kind of enter into the K-pop market
Speaker 1: and does that bridge back to the U.S, I think, is still an open question.
Speaker 1: Um, certainly K-Pop is incredibly popular amongst Americans, but whether or not it's helping, let's say, a Korean American, artist break into the American Pop market,
Speaker 1: I don't think I've seen a lot of evidence of that yet. It is helping maybe some Korean artists gain some notoriety here, but not like in any immense way.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think also that's one of the things that's interesting about, when you-- when you start talking about Asia, 'cause, for example, in Japan, you have these people who are like, like really students of hip hop.
Speaker 2: Like they've, like, studied-- studied y'know like how hip hop came out of the South Bronx and they kind of like have a Wikipedia understanding of it.
Speaker 2: You know, like if they breakdance, they kind of have a very, uh, maybe, maybe like their movements are very accurate but they grew up in a
Speaker 2: very different environment, of course, than what hip hop came out of and the spirit of hip hop.
Speaker 2: Where in Korea, K-pop started off very much similar to like, pop, R&-- not R&B, but pop singing like Katy Perry kind of stuff,
Speaker 2: but they started incorporating rapping into it but still continued calling it K-pop and so you have an artist like G-Dragon,
Speaker 2: who, if you watch a music video, he has very Pharrell, Andre 3000 kind of tendencies, but he's participating in K-pop as a genre.
Speaker 2: But when Pharrell goes to Korea, he's like hanging out and touring with G Dragon and so,
Speaker 2: then you have this blending where folks from different musical communities are now kind of intersecting with each other in kind of interesting ways.
Speaker 2: I guess another really weird and interesting case study would be K-Trap.
Speaker 2: Which is, in different Asian countries, I think actually because, y'know, all of us are talking about dissertations.
Speaker 2: I can write a dissertation-- or not-- about Asian Trap music and how folks in Asia are getting access to Trap,
Speaker 2: which is coming out of the American South and I think because of the syllables and the way that you deliver Korean as a language,
Speaker 2: or Japanese as a language, it kind of lends itself to Trap-- and that kind of rhythmic tone-- as opposed to maybe, earlier forms of rapping.
Speaker 2: So you had uh... What's his name - that came out with K Trap?
[[Audience response: Keith Ape]]
Speaker 2: Keith Ape, right, so Keith Ape came out with a song and it was very much borrowing from Trap music
Speaker 2: and then they had a remix with ASAP Ferg and Dumbfoundead and Father, so then you have all these Southern trap artists who heard this Korean song
Speaker 2: and was like I wanna hop on that, and then there's this really interesting kind of exchange in that way.
Speaker 3: Can I answer real quick? The K-pop thing, I think it's just another step in the changing ways that Asian Americans, specifically Asian American males, are now getting cooler, right, the concept being cool.
Speaker 3: Umm... I can translate back to America's Best Dance Crew, like when that came out, and umm, what's that group called? The...
Speaker 1: Jabbawockeez?
Speaker 3: Jabbawockeez! You know, Filipino-American crew... They got on TV, they were killin it, and then suddenly it lasts like 10 years.
Speaker 3: I guess there's definitely a change in the landscape in how Asian Americans, Asian American males, and pop landscape are perceived.
Speaker 1: A lot of that is based around the performance of sort of, like, conventional black masculinity, which is a really deep point to try to end with because you can open up a whole lot of discussion around that.
Speaker 1: Can we go over one more question, Sojin? Alright.
Speaker 1: Anyone? Yes.
Speaker 1: Th-- the question is how does Cibo Matto, which is a pair of Japanese, um, artists, who were at the time living and recording-- I think-- in New York, um and they had sort of a, you know, a kind of a moment with their album in 1994, how do they fit into this narrative, um, I mean do you-- do you have any thoughts?
Speaker 1: I mean to me they kind of don't if only, an-- and, I mean a lot of these- a lot of these distinctions between where is the line between Asia and Asian American are-- are they're fluid, they're arbitrary to a certain extent, uh
Speaker 1: and I think partially because Cibo Matto were Japanese nationals, even if they were recorded in the US, I don't think that is the same way as a lot of the artists that we're talking about,
Speaker 1: who were either the children of immigrants growing up, born and raised in the US, or have spent at least the bulk of their lives here and so, and again, you could argue that's a very arbitrary distinction,
Speaker 1: but someone like Irocki Rivera, who's Filipino American, born and raised in the Bay Area, to me is different than people who are Japanese by nationality and ethnicity who happen to record an album in the US, that got-- that made waves in the US
Speaker 1: now of course, to a non Asian listener, maybe there is no difference at all, as long as they see an Asian face that's really what-- where the difference lies
Speaker 1: I think for Asian Americans, we have a very long history of trying to remind people that we're American and Asian American but we're not necessarily Asian Asian because those kind of separations around geo-- geography and nationality and identity become very important, if we always are constantly feeling like we're marginalized for not being sufficiently American enough, if that makes sense, yeah.
Speaker 2: And I think also like, Cibo Matto, the-the community that they participated in, genre wise, was kind of, you know, more-more on like the indie, kind of rock scene.
Speaker 2: And so, even though they did have tracks where they were, like, rapping, or where they were, like, doing poetry, um, I don't think that, you know,  like, you definitely didn't find them in the hip hop section of record stores.
Speaker 2: I think they-they weren't trying to turn the urban charts. But I think, also, in a lot of ways they, uh, were very much ahead of their time because now, you know like we were saying earlier,
Speaker 2: you know, like, when you have folks who are, you know, grew up in Asia but are now nationals in the US and then, also, Asian Americans who grew up in-- you know, like in K-Pop, you have a lot of the biggest stars actually born and raised in the US and then moved to Korea and found like massive fame that they, you know, would not have found in the US with this kind of landscape.
Speaker 2: And then, from there, they very much, in Korea, they very much take them on as Koreans even though they were, like, maybe raised in California or something. And so, I think Cibo Matto definitely came out, uh, at a time where, uh, that just- you know, the politics of grace,
Speaker 2: the understandings of-- of, you know, like genres blending into each other at the time, I think, like, rock and hip hop were very segregated from each other. I remember that when rappers would try to do, like, rock songs, they would always have, like, really basic electric guitar riffs, uh, you know, like hair metal kind of thing, and so, that, I think that that has changed a lot, but, um
Speaker 2: I would say where you get Chibo Matto kind of actually entering the hip hop sphere is with the producer, right, so, uh, Dan the Automator started working with Chibo Matto. So, Dan the Automator is a Japanese American from the Bay Area, uh, and actually, had his hand in a lot of hip hop classics.
Speaker 2: So, Kool Keith, Dr. Octogon, he produced that, uh, later on, Del the Funky Homosapien, also out of- out of the Bay area, he produced Deltron 3030, but these are all kind of, like, cult classic underground hits, uh, and I guess like, the-the track, or the album that folks recognize the most would be when Automator uh, did the first Gorillaz album.
Speaker 2: And so, with Gorillaz you have- you have, um, uh, uh, who was it, Damon Albarn who-who is from Blur, you have Automator, who has, uh, a lineage of, like, you know, hip hop classics, you have Del the Funky Homosapien, and then you have one of the members of Chibo Matto.
Speaker 2: And they all kind of like mashed up in like, the late '90s, like right at the time when hip hop, uh, and rock, and internet music all started kind of, like, blending together. And so, I think the first Gorillaz album is like an interesting kind of case study where you can't really fit it in one genre, and you can't really even fit it in one country because all the different people that participated in that project.
Speaker 1: Unfortunately we have to wrap up, you guys have been great, thank you for staying with us this whole time. Um, just as a quick reminder, Patrick and I are going to be doing a, uh, Buscuit history of DJ styles, not necessarily Asian American specific, but a history of DJ styles, uh, today at 2:45 just across the way at the studio.
Speaker 1: So, if you like us, come back and catch us then, but otherwise, thank you so much for coming, uh, out this afternoon.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 2: One more plug, too, in case you're interested, uh, at Asian American conditioning, uh, if you go down to the Arts and Industry Building at 1:15, uh, we'll be featuring another artist from the, uh, Filipino American Soundscapes program.
Speaker 2: Her name is Lo Leaf. She has worked with, like, King Grit and Flying Locust and definitely coming out of the LA Electronic/R&B scene so, uh, she'll be there with her keyboard and her harp playing, uh, and then also, tonight, uh, unfortunately this is a 21 and up event, but, uh, uh, at from 7:00-9:00 pm,
Speaker 2: Bamboo and Lo Leaf will be playing full sets over on U Street at Tropicalia. Uh, it's a free event, and so come through to that if you're looking for something that's, uh, kind of, maybe, closer, or further, to home, so, thanks y'all.
[Speaker 3] Thank you! Please, uh, join me in thanking, once again, Angelo Lewis, Oliver Wang, and DJ Patrick.
[Clapping]
[Speaker 3] Our next session here on On the Move is 1:00 and every hour until 5:00, um, while you are waiting, um, please take the time to map your own immigration experiences on either of the red walls, and our visual display is at Arts and Industry. So, see you at 1:00, for forced Japanese migration internment camps during World War II.
[[Silence]]